iommu_ref_model/README.md, before:

# RISC-V IOMMU reference model
This code implements the RISC-V IOMMU specification - https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-iommu - and
is intended to be a behavioural reference model for the specification.

# Files organization
- libiommu  - Files implementing the specification
- libtables - a support library to build page and directory tables
- test      - a sample test application illustrating how to invoke and use libiommu and libtables

# Building and Running tests
The project builds two libraries libiommu.a and libtables.a. The test application links to both
the libraries and uses the API provided by libtables to build the memory resident tables.

The test application may be run by invoking `make run`. The test application should print the status
of the tests and a coverage report on the reference model. The coverage report may be used to guide
generation of further tests.

The reference model, may be used in conjuction with a IOMMU to verify the behavior of the IOMMU. For
example, the tests may provide identical stimulus to the IOMMU reference model and the IOMMU and 
compare the results. The debug interface of the IOMMU may be used to provide stimulus when its simpler
not to use real IO devices to generate the stimulus.

The stock test application generates the following output.
```bash
Running IOMMU test suite
Test 01 : All inbound transactions disallowed      : PASS
Test 02 : Bare mode tests                          : PASS
Test 03 : Too wide device_id                       : PASS
Test 04 : Non-leaf DDTE invalid                    : PASS
:
:
Test 27 : Illegal commands and CQ mem faults       : PASS
Test 28 : Sv32 mode                                : PASS
Test 29 : Misc. Register Access tests              : PASS

Coverage report
File 'src/iommu_atc.c'                             :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_ats.c'                             :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_command_queue.c'                   :100.00%
:
:
File 'src/iommu_reg.c'                             :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_s_vs_stage_trans.c'                :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_translate.c'                       :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_utils.c'                           :100.00%

```

# Reference model test bench functions
To drive the reference mode, the model exposes the following APIs that must be
implemented by the test bench:

1. **`uint8_t read_memory(uint64_t address, uint8_t size, char *data)`**

This function is used by the reference model to read memory. The bit 0 of the 
return value may be set to 1 to indicate an access violation and the bit 1 set 
to 1 to indicate that the data returned is corrupted and thus must cause a data 
corruption fault. If neither bits are set then the read is assumed to be 
successful and the data bytes placed in the buffer identified by the data 
parameter.

2. **`uint8_t read_memory_for_AMO(uint64_t address, uint8_t size, char *data)`**

This API works is used by the reference model to read memory for an atomic memory
operation but is otherwise identical to the read_memory API.

3. **`uint8_t write_memory(char *data, uint64_t address, uint32_t size)`**

This function is used by the reference model to write memory. The bit 0 of the 
return value may be set to 1 to indicate an access violation. If the return value is
0 then the write is assumed to be successful and the data bytes in the buffer 
identified by the data parameter are written to the memory identified by the address
parameter.

4. **`void iommu_to_hb_do_global_observability_sync(uint8_t PR, uint8_t PW)`**

This function is invoked by the IOMMU to request the test bench to perform the global observability
actions for previous reads if PR is 1 and for previous writes if PW is 1. When the function returns
the IOMMU model assumes that all previous read and/or write are globally observed as requested.

5. **`void send_msg_iommu_to_hb(ats_msg_t *prgr)`**

This function is invoked by the IOMMU to send a ATS message - Invalidation request or a page request
group response - to the test bench.

# Reference model functions

These functions are provided by the reference model to the test bench to input stimulii and 
obtain responses from the model.

1. **`uint64_t read_register(uint16_t offset, uint8_t num_bytes)`**

This function is provided by the reference model to read a memory mapped IOMMU
register. The register is identified by the offset parameter and the number of bytes
read is identified by the num_bytes parameter. The register data is returned by the
function. If the access is invalid then the function returns all 1's i.e. an abort
response.

2. **`void write_register(uint16_t offset, uint8_t num_bytes, uint64_t data)`**

This function is provided by the reference model to write a memory mapped IOMMU
register. The register is identified by the offset parameter and the number of bytes
written is identified by the num_bytes parameter. The data to be written is provided
in the data parameter. If the access is invalid then the function drops the write i.e.
an abort response.

3. **`int reset_iommu(uint8_t num_hpm, uint8_t hpmctr_bits, uint16_t eventID_mask, uint8_t num_vec_bits, uint8_t reset_iommu_mode, capabilities_t capabilities, fctrl_t fctrl)`**

This function is provided by the reference model to establish the resset default state.
The num_hpm indicates the number of hardware performace monitoring counters to be 
implemented by the model and the hpmctr_bits indicates the width of the counters in bits.
The eventID_mask indicates the width of the eventID field in the hardware performance
monitoring event registers that should be implemented by the reference model. The 
num_vec_bits indicates the width in bits of the vector field of the ICVEC register. The
default IOMMU mode - Off or Bare - is selected by the reset_iommu_mode parameter. The 
capabilities of the IOMMU that should be implemented are specified by the capabilities
parameter. The default value of the feature control register is provided by the fctrl
parameter. The function returns 0 if the reference model could be successfully initialized
with the provided parameters.

4. **`void iommu_translate_iova(hb_to_iommu_req_t *req, iommu_to_hb_rsp_t *rsp_msg)`**

This function is used by the test bench to invoke the translation request interface in the
IOMMU. The translation response is returned in the buffer pointed to by rsp_msg.

5. **`void handle_page_request(ats_msg_t *pr)`**

This function is used by the test bench to send a page request message to the IOMMU.

6. **`uint8_t handle_invalidation_completion(ats_msg_t *inv_cc)`**

This function is used by the test bench to send a invalidation completion message to the IOMMU.

7. **`void do_ats_timer_expiry(uint32_t itag_vector)`**

This function is used by the test bench to signal a timeout for one or more ATS invalidation
requests sent by the IOMMU. 

8. **`void process_commands(void)`**

This function when invoked causes the IOMMU to process a command from the command queue. This
function acts like a "clock" and in each invocation processes one command. If multiple command
processing is required then the function should be invoked for each command.


# Libtables functions
The following functions are provided by the libtables to build memory resident data structures.
The functions do not implement extensive error checking and providing bad inputs may lead to bad
tables being created.

1. **`uint64_t add_dev_context(device_context_t *DC, uint32_t device_id)`**

This function is used to build the device directory table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the device context in the leaf entry. The function returns the address, in test memory
space, where the leaf entry was inserted. 

2. **`uint64_t add_process_context(device_context_t *DC, process_context_t *PC, uint32_t process_id)`**

This function is used to build the process directory table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the process context in the leaf entry. The function returns the address, in test memory
space, where the leaf entry was inserted. 

3. **`uint64_t add_g_stage_pte(iohgatp_t iohgatp, uint64_t gpa, gpte_t gpte, uint8_t add_level)`**

This function is used to build the G-stage page table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the leaf entry at the requested level. The level value of 0 indicates that the entry
should be added at the last level possible for the G-stage page table i.e. a 4K or a NAPOT 64K entry.
Larger mappings may be created, as appropriate for the mode in iohgatp, by specifying higher levels.
The function may invoke the get_ppn function to request pages to build the page table. The function
returns the address, in test memory space, where the leaf entry was inserted.


4. **`uint64_t add_s_stage_pte(iosatp_t satp, uint64_t va, pte_t pte, uint8_t add_level)`**

This function is used to build the S-stage page table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the leaf entry at the requested level. The level value of 0 indicates that the entry
should be added at the last level possible for the S-stage page table i.e. a 4K or a NAPOT 64K entry.
Larger mappings may be created, as appropriate for the mode in satp, by specifying higher levels.
The function may invoke the get_ppn function to request pages to build the page table. The function
returns the address, in test memory space, where the leaf entry was inserted.

5. **`uint64_t add_vs_stage_pte(iosatp_t satp, uint64_t va, pte_t pte, uint8_t add_level, iohgatp_t iohgatp)`**

This function is used to build the VS-stage page table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the leaf entry at the requested level. The level value of 0 indicates that the entry
should be added at the last level possible for the VS-stage page table i.e. a 4K or a NAPOT 64K entry.
Larger mappings may be created, as appropriate for the mode in satp, by specifying higher levels.
The function may invoke the get_gppn function to request pages to build the page table. The function
maps the obtained gppn into the G-stage page table determined by iohgatp. The function returns the address, 
in test memory space, where the leaf entry was inserted.

6. **`uint64_t translate_gpa (iohgatp_t iohgatp, uint64_t gpa, uint64_t *spa)`**

This function is used to translate a gpa to a spa. The function also returns the G-stage pte that provides
the translation as an address in test memory space.

# Libtables test bench functions
These functions are invoked by the libtables functions to allocate memory for the table structures. These
are provided by the test bench that invokes the libtables.

1. **`uint64_t get_free_ppn(uint64_t num_ppn)`**

This function is used to allocate a set of pages in the test memory space. The function should provide
a range of pages with the base page aligned to num_ppn.

2. **`uint64_t get_free_gppn(uint64_t num_gppn, iohgatp_t iohgatp)`**

This function is used to allocate a set of pages in the memory space of the guest associated with iohgatp. 
The function should provide a range of pages with the base page aligned to num_gppn.

Commit message:

Add a helper to extract attributes

iommu_ref_model/README.md, after:

# RISC-V IOMMU reference model
This code implements the RISC-V IOMMU specification - https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-iommu - and
is intended to be a behavioural reference model for the specification.

# Files organization
- libiommu  - Files implementing the specification
- libtables - a support library to build page and directory tables
- test      - a sample test application illustrating how to invoke and use libiommu and libtables

# Building and Running tests
The project builds two libraries libiommu.a and libtables.a. The test application links to both
the libraries and uses the API provided by libtables to build the memory resident tables.

The test application may be run by invoking `make run`. The test application should print the status
of the tests and a coverage report on the reference model. The coverage report may be used to guide
generation of further tests.

The reference model, may be used in conjuction with a IOMMU to verify the behavior of the IOMMU. For
example, the tests may provide identical stimulus to the IOMMU reference model and the IOMMU and 
compare the results. The debug interface of the IOMMU may be used to provide stimulus when its simpler
not to use real IO devices to generate the stimulus.

The stock test application generates the following output.
```bash
Running IOMMU test suite
Test 01 : All inbound transactions disallowed      : PASS
Test 02 : Bare mode tests                          : PASS
Test 03 : Too wide device_id                       : PASS
Test 04 : Non-leaf DDTE invalid                    : PASS
:
:
Test 27 : Illegal commands and CQ mem faults       : PASS
Test 28 : Sv32 mode                                : PASS
Test 29 : Misc. Register Access tests              : PASS

Coverage report
File 'src/iommu_atc.c'                             :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_ats.c'                             :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_command_queue.c'                   :100.00%
:
:
File 'src/iommu_reg.c'                             :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_s_vs_stage_trans.c'                :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_translate.c'                       :100.00%
File 'src/iommu_utils.c'                           :100.00%

```

# Reference model test bench functions
To drive the reference mode, the model exposes the following APIs that must be
implemented by the test bench:

1. **`uint8_t read_memory(uint64_t address, uint8_t size, char *data)`**

This function is used by the reference model to read memory. The bit 0 of the 
return value may be set to 1 to indicate an access violation and the bit 1 set 
to 1 to indicate that the data returned is corrupted and thus must cause a data 
corruption fault. If neither bits are set then the read is assumed to be 
successful and the data bytes placed in the buffer identified by the data 
parameter.

2. **`uint8_t read_memory_for_AMO(uint64_t address, uint8_t size, char *data)`**

This API works is used by the reference model to read memory for an atomic memory
operation but is otherwise identical to the read_memory API.

3. **`uint8_t write_memory(char *data, uint64_t address, uint32_t size)`**

This function is used by the reference model to write memory. The bit 0 of the 
return value may be set to 1 to indicate an access violation. If the return value is
0 then the write is assumed to be successful and the data bytes in the buffer 
identified by the data parameter are written to the memory identified by the address
parameter.

4. **`void iommu_to_hb_do_global_observability_sync(uint8_t PR, uint8_t PW)`**

This function is invoked by the IOMMU to request the test bench to perform the global observability
actions for previous reads if PR is 1 and for previous writes if PW is 1. When the function returns
the IOMMU model assumes that all previous read and/or write are globally observed as requested.

5. **`void send_msg_iommu_to_hb(ats_msg_t *prgr)`**

This function is invoked by the IOMMU to send a ATS message - Invalidation request or a page request
group response - to the test bench.

# Reference model functions

These functions are provided by the reference model to the test bench to input stimulii and 
obtain responses from the model.

1. **`uint64_t read_register(uint16_t offset, uint8_t num_bytes)`**

This function is provided by the reference model to read a memory mapped IOMMU
register. The register is identified by the offset parameter and the number of bytes
read is identified by the num_bytes parameter. The register data is returned by the
function. If the access is invalid then the function returns all 1's i.e. an abort
response.

2. **`void write_register(uint16_t offset, uint8_t num_bytes, uint64_t data)`**

This function is provided by the reference model to write a memory mapped IOMMU
register. The register is identified by the offset parameter and the number of bytes
written is identified by the num_bytes parameter. The data to be written is provided
in the data parameter. If the access is invalid then the function drops the write i.e.
an abort response.

3. **`int reset_iommu(uint8_t num_hpm, uint8_t hpmctr_bits, uint16_t eventID_mask, uint8_t num_vec_bits, uint8_t reset_iommu_mode, capabilities_t capabilities, fctrl_t fctrl)`**

This function is provided by the reference model to establish the resset default state.
The num_hpm indicates the number of hardware performace monitoring counters to be 
implemented by the model and the hpmctr_bits indicates the width of the counters in bits.
The eventID_mask indicates the width of the eventID field in the hardware performance
monitoring event registers that should be implemented by the reference model. The 
num_vec_bits indicates the width in bits of the vector field of the ICVEC register. The
default IOMMU mode - Off or Bare - is selected by the reset_iommu_mode parameter. The 
capabilities of the IOMMU that should be implemented are specified by the capabilities
parameter. The default value of the feature control register is provided by the fctrl
parameter. The function returns 0 if the reference model could be successfully initialized
with the provided parameters.

4. **`void iommu_translate_iova(hb_to_iommu_req_t *req, iommu_to_hb_rsp_t *rsp_msg)`**

This function is used by the test bench to invoke the translation request interface in the
IOMMU. The translation response is returned in the buffer pointed to by rsp_msg.

5. **`void handle_page_request(ats_msg_t *pr)`**

This function is used by the test bench to send a page request message to the IOMMU.

6. **`uint8_t handle_invalidation_completion(ats_msg_t *inv_cc)`**

This function is used by the test bench to send a invalidation completion message to the IOMMU.

7. **`void do_ats_timer_expiry(uint32_t itag_vector)`**

This function is used by the test bench to signal a timeout for one or more ATS invalidation
requests sent by the IOMMU. 

8. **`void process_commands(void)`**

This function when invoked causes the IOMMU to process a command from the command queue. This
function acts like a "clock" and in each invocation processes one command. If multiple command
processing is required then the function should be invoked for each command.

9. **`void get_attribs_from_req(hb_to_iommu_req_t *req, uint8_t *read, uint8_t *write, uint8_t *exec, uint8_t *priv)`**

This function is used to extract the read, write, execute, and privilege
attributes from the the request.

# Libtables functions
The following functions are provided by the libtables to build memory resident data structures.
The functions do not implement extensive error checking and providing bad inputs may lead to bad
tables being created.

1. **`uint64_t add_dev_context(device_context_t *DC, uint32_t device_id)`**

This function is used to build the device directory table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the device context in the leaf entry. The function returns the address, in test memory
space, where the leaf entry was inserted. 

2. **`uint64_t add_process_context(device_context_t *DC, process_context_t *PC, uint32_t process_id)`**

This function is used to build the process directory table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the process context in the leaf entry. The function returns the address, in test memory
space, where the leaf entry was inserted. 

3. **`uint64_t add_g_stage_pte(iohgatp_t iohgatp, uint64_t gpa, gpte_t gpte, uint8_t add_level)`**

This function is used to build the G-stage page table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the leaf entry at the requested level. The level value of 0 indicates that the entry
should be added at the last level possible for the G-stage page table i.e. a 4K or a NAPOT 64K entry.
Larger mappings may be created, as appropriate for the mode in iohgatp, by specifying higher levels.
The function may invoke the get_ppn function to request pages to build the page table. The function
returns the address, in test memory space, where the leaf entry was inserted.


4. **`uint64_t add_s_stage_pte(iosatp_t satp, uint64_t va, pte_t pte, uint8_t add_level)`**

This function is used to build the S-stage page table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the leaf entry at the requested level. The level value of 0 indicates that the entry
should be added at the last level possible for the S-stage page table i.e. a 4K or a NAPOT 64K entry.
Larger mappings may be created, as appropriate for the mode in satp, by specifying higher levels.
The function may invoke the get_ppn function to request pages to build the page table. The function
returns the address, in test memory space, where the leaf entry was inserted.

5. **`uint64_t add_vs_stage_pte(iosatp_t satp, uint64_t va, pte_t pte, uint8_t add_level, iohgatp_t iohgatp)`**

This function is used to build the VS-stage page table by adding non-leaf entries when needed
and inserting the leaf entry at the requested level. The level value of 0 indicates that the entry
should be added at the last level possible for the VS-stage page table i.e. a 4K or a NAPOT 64K entry.
Larger mappings may be created, as appropriate for the mode in satp, by specifying higher levels.
The function may invoke the get_gppn function to request pages to build the page table. The function
maps the obtained gppn into the G-stage page table determined by iohgatp. The function returns the address, 
in test memory space, where the leaf entry was inserted.

6. **`uint64_t translate_gpa (iohgatp_t iohgatp, uint64_t gpa, uint64_t *spa)`**

This function is used to translate a gpa to a spa. The function also returns the G-stage pte that provides
the translation as an address in test memory space.

# Libtables test bench functions
These functions are invoked by the libtables functions to allocate memory for the table structures. These
are provided by the test bench that invokes the libtables.

1. **`uint64_t get_free_ppn(uint64_t num_ppn)`**

This function is used to allocate a set of pages in the test memory space. The function should provide
a range of pages with the base page aligned to num_ppn.

2. **`uint64_t get_free_gppn(uint64_t num_gppn, iohgatp_t iohgatp)`**

This function is used to allocate a set of pages in the memory space of the guest associated with iohgatp. 
The function should provide a range of pages with the base page aligned to num_gppn.
